---
title: How to design a HIPAA Compliant Healthcare API, Part 3
date: 2014-07-11
author: travis
author_full: Travis Good, MD
author_alt:
tags: HIPAA, compliance, process
---

This is the third post in our series on building a HIPAA compliant healthcare [API](/baas). The [first](/blog/how-to-design-a-hipaa-compliant-healthcare-api) and [second](https://www.catalyze.io/blog/how-to-design-a-hipaa-compliant-healthcare-api-part-2-1/) post focused on technology, design of the API and data models respectively. This post delves into HIPAA compliance more broadly than technology, and highlights some of the key areas where Catalyze is different from other infrastructure and HIPAA compliant API vendors.

HIPAA is about a lot [more](https://catalyze.io/hipaa/) than technology. There are organizational and administrative requirements that are a part of HIPAA. When we started Catalyze we had a lot of experience with HIPAA from a multitude of angles - clinical, auditor, vendor, and consultant. We realized that "HIPAA compliant" was a loaded phrase in healthcare. Initially we shied away from calling our technology "HIPAA compliant", instead using phrases like "HIPAA grade" in place of it. The reason we shied away was that 1) HIPAA is about more than technology and 2) there isn't a central body that certifies HIPAA compliance.

Calling an API, or server or platform or database, HIPAA compliant typically means that the provider of that technology signs a [business associate agreement (BAA)](/blog/business-associate-agreements/) and has additional security controls, and maybe more data segregation. This is what providers today call "HIPAA compliant hosting" or "HIPAA compliant storage". You can see this clearly in this question on Quora, to which we also contributed.

<span class="quora-content-embed" data-name="Does-anyone-provide-hosting-services-that-are-HIPAA-compliant-i-e-like-Engine-Yard-but-engineered-for-HIPAA-as-well/answer/Travis-Good/quote/1527882">Read <a data-width="576" data-height="956" class="quora-content-link" href="http://www.quora.com/Does-anyone-provide-hosting-services-that-are-HIPAA-compliant-i-e-like-Engine-Yard-but-engineered-for-HIPAA-as-well/answer/Travis-Good/quote/1527882" data-embed="BeDn8Fj" data-type="quote" data-id="1527882" data-key="c49764f8811634b48147e4c4cfdfbcc0">Quote of Travis Good's answer to Does anyone provide hosting services that are HIPAA compliant? (i.e. like Engine Yard but engineered for HIPAA as well?)</a> on <a href="http://www.quora.com">Quora</a><script type="text/javascript" src="http://www.quora.com/widgets/content"></script></span>

If you read the responses in that question you get the sense that vendors offering compliant infrastructure do things like providing dedicated hardware, potentially with more more software security. The compliant storage and hosting providers aren't themselves compliant with HIPAA, meaning they don't meet the organizational and administrative requirements. The vendors typically don't feel they need to be compliant with all the requirements of HIPAA because they are only offering the technology.

While this is still a gray, but growing, area of HIPAA, we built Catalyze to support the efforts of developers, vendors, and enterprises building healthcare technology. We decided that, in order to maximize the value our customers get from using our API and trusting us with their compliant infrastructure, offering a HIPAA compliant API means we need to follow all of the requirements of HIPAA, not purely build the technology to support compliance and check the box of signing a BAA. There are are other benefits for us, like being able to better assist customers that need full HIPAA audit support.

The other big reason we chose to fully comply with HIPAA is that we wanted to help our customers overcome the other hurdle of HIPAA compliance, which is selling to to healthcare enterprises. Hospitals, health systems, and insurance companies are risk averse. As soon as you tell them you're using cloud-based technologies to store, process, or transmit data they will likely ask you to respond to a litany of questions about your technology and organization. Our theory was that, as a fully compliant API vendor, we would be able to help customers in completing these questions and verifying compliance, ideally reducing the time customers spend on compliance as part of the sales cycle. Our audit reports and whitepapers on HIPAA compliance could be used as sales and marketing collateral for our customers. That theory has proved out, and we have been told by our customers that our audits and [100% compliance](https://catalyze.io/blog/what-does-it-take-to-be-100-hipaa-compliant/) with HIPAA have been beneficial and valuable in discussions and sales with enterprises.

Because we don't think of HIPAA compliance as only technology, we are able to support our customers more broadly than other HIPAA compliant vendors. We are also able to confidently market and sell our API as HIPAA compliant, with audit reports, [policies](https://catalyze.io/policy/), and [documentation](https://catalyze.io/hipaa/) to prove it. We are not just a secure API technology, we are a fully compliant organization that builds and maintains a HIPAA compliant API.